# WebSocket hooks

The `useWebSocket` hook provides access to a client connection to the WebSocket
server, which is responsible for broadcasting events from the indexer. The
client is a singleton, meaing all hooks provide the same client. This
architecture removes the need for multiple connections or constant
re-connections when the page changes.

The `useWebSocketChannel(s)` hooks wrap the web socket hook and return one or
several subscriptions to channels, keeping track of how many subscriptions there
are to each channel across the whole app. `AppContextProvider` will unsubscribe
from a channel once all listeners have stopped listening to it.

The `useOnWebSocketMessage` hook wraps the channel listener and provides a
simple interface to subscribe to messages across one or many channels matching
an expected type and calling a callback function when necessary.

The `useOnCurrentDaoWebSocketMessage` hook is a shortcut for the above hook to
connect to the current DAO's channel. This can only be used when on a DAO's
page.

### Which one should I use?

You most likely want to use `useOnWebSocketMessage` or
`useOnCurrentDaoWebSocketMessage` if you're adding WebSocket functionality. The
web socket and channel hooks manage the connection and subscriptions, so you
don't have to worry about those. `useOnWebSocketMessage` is useful for
subscribing to multiple channels, such as the inbox that wants to be notified of
new proposals for all followed DAOs. `useOnCurrentDaoWebSocketMessage` on the
other hand is useful for subscribing to the current DAO's channel, such as the
proposal page that wants to refresh when a vote is cast on the current DAO.

## How to subscribe to WebSocket events for a DAO

The `useOnCurrentDaoWebSocketMessage` hook assumes the WebSocket always sends
messages under the `broadcast` event name with a payload that contains `type` (a
string) and `data` (an object).

This hook accepts two required arguments and 1 optional argument:

- `expectedTypeOrTypes` (required, string or string array): The type or types of
  message you're expecting to receive.
- `onMessage` (required, function): A callback function that will be called when
  a message is received if its contained `type` matches the expected type(s). It
  will be passed the `data` object from the message payload.
- `defaultFallbackData` (optional, object): This only makes sense after the
  hook's response is explained, below. Keep reading.

This hook returns an object with two properties:

- `listening` (boolean): This is `true` if the hook is currently listening for
  messages. It's `false` if the hook is not listening for messages. This
  represents whether or not the WebSocket is connected. It should ideally be
  `true` most of the time, since the WebSocket should be connected for the
  entire time the app is open to a DAO page. If it's `false`, it likely means
  the user is not connected to the Internet, though the WebSocket server could
  have crashed. The WebSocket should attempt to reconnect automatically, but
  nothing is guaranteed.
- `fallback` (function): Since the listener is not guaranteed to be listening,
  this function is provided that, when called, conditionally triggers the
  `onMessage` callback. The conditions are described below. It accepts an
  optional `data` object that will be passed to the `onMessage` callback, and an
  optional `options` object to configure its behavior.
  - If `data` is not provided, the `defaultFallbackData` object passed to the
    hook will be used. If neither the `data` argument nor `defaultFallbackData`
    hook argument is passed, `fallback` calls `onMessage` with an empty object.
  - The `options` object contains `skipWait` and `onlyIfNotListening`, which are
    both booleans. If `skipWait` is `true`, `fallback` will trigger the callback
    immediately, not waiting for the next block. If `onlyIfNotListening` is
    `true`, `fallback` will only trigger the `onMessage` callback if the
    listener is not active (i.e. `listening` is `false`). This is especially
    useful if critical behavior relies on the listener receiving a message. For
    example, when casting a vote that needs to refresh and display the vote once
    cast, calling `fallback` after the vote transaction with the `data` object
    that would have been received from the WebSocket ensures that callback will
    be triggered even if the listener is down. Since `skipWait` defaults to
    `false` and `onlyIfNotListening` defaults to `true`, the default behavior of
    this fallback function is to trigger the callback after waiting for the next
    block, only if the listener is not active.

The `onMessage` callback argument and `fallback` function in the response are
both automatically memoized, so it's safe to pass callback functions without
wrapping them in a `useCallback` to `onMessage`, and it's also safe to pass
`fallback` as a dependency to other hooks without causing unnecessary
re-renders.

### What about `useOnWebSocketMessage`?

`useOnWebSocketMessage` is the same as the above hook, except it contains an
extra argument at the beginning for a list of channel names to apply the handler
to. Under the hood, `useOnCurrentDaoWebSocketMessage` simply uses
`useOnWebSocketMessage` with one channel—the current DAO.

## Example

Check out the [`DaoProposal` component](../components/dao/DaoProposal.tsx) to
see this hook in action. It's used to subscribe to the `proposal` and `vote`
events to keep the UI up to date and display success alerts when the user's
vote, execution, and close actions finalize on-chain.

## Fallback implementation notes

I tried to make it so that the fallback would wait to see if a message of the
expected type arrived within the next block before deciding to trigger the
callback; this would ensure that the callback would still be called if the
WebSocket were listening OR if the WebSocket pretended to be listening but no
event arrived after a small (1-2) block timeout. This would guarantee that even
if the WebSocket were connected, but the indexer was down, the callback would
still be called after a reasonable timeout.

However, it turns out that the indexer => WebSocket pipeline is _so fast_ that
the desired message tends to arrive _before_ the signing client's `execute`
(i.e. transaction sign/broadcast) Promise resolves. The fallback can only be
called after the Promise resolves since we have to wait for the wallet to
approve a transaction before waiting for its response. Thus, this fallback
implementation would often lead to duplicate callback executions, because the
fallback would be unable to detect the message in most cases.

This could be solved by storing the recent messages received, though this would
create a lot of additional complexity; also, the same event could occur several
times with no variation between messages—since, for example, some proposals let
you cast revotes—so detecting if the event we expect to happen has already
happened would be imperfect.

IMO the best solution is to make sure the indexer is functioning properly; worst
case (rare) scenario is that the user gets stuck in a loading state after they
perform some action, and they just have to refresh the page to fix it. This
should only ever happen if the WebSocket is connected but the indexer is down.
